Title: Machine Learning in Epidemiology and Health Outcomes Research

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31577910/

Abstract: Machine learning approaches to modeling of epidemiologic data are becoming increasingly more prevalent in the literature. These methods have the potential to improve our understanding of health and opportunities for intervention, far beyond our past capabilities. This article provides a walkthrough for creating supervised machine learning models with current examples from the literature. From identifying an appropriate sample and selecting features through training, testing, and assessing performance, the end-to-end approach to machine learning can be a daunting task. We take the reader through each step in the process and discuss novel concepts in the area of machine learning, including identifying treatment effects and explaining the output from machine learning models.
Title: Artificial Intelligence in Public Health and Epidemiology

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30157525/

Abstract: Objectives:To introduce and summarize current research in the field of Public Health and Epidemiology Informatics.Methods:The 2017 literature concerning public health and epidemiology informatics was searched in PubMed and Web of Science, and the returned references were reviewed by the two section editors to select 14 candidate best papers. These papers were then peer-reviewed by external reviewers to provide the editorial team with an enlightened vision to select the best papers.Results:Among the 843 references retrieved from PubMed and Web of Science, two were finally selected as best papers. The first one analyzes the relationship between the disease, social/mass media, and public emotions to understand public overreaction (leading to a noticeable reduction of social and economic activities) in the context of a nation-wide outbreak of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in Korea in 2015. The second paper concerns a new methodology to de-identify patient notes in electronic health records based on artificial neural networks that outperformed existing methods.Conclusions:Surveillance is still a productive topic in public health informatics but other very important topics in Public Health are appearing. For example, the use of artificial intelligence approaches is increasing.
Title: Artificial Intelligence and Public Health: An Exploratory Study

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36901550/

Abstract: Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to revolutionize research by automating data analysis, generating new insights, and supporting the discovery of new knowledge. The top 10 contribution areas of AI towards public health were gathered in this exploratory study. We utilized the "text-davinci-003" model of GPT-3, using OpenAI playground default parameters. The model was trained with the largest training dataset any AI had, limited to a cut-off date in 2021. This study aimed to test the ability of GPT-3 to advance public health and to explore the feasibility of using AI as a scientific co-author. We asked the AI asked for structured input, including scientific quotations, and reviewed responses for plausibility. We found that GPT-3 was able to assemble, summarize, and generate plausible text blocks relevant for public health concerns, elucidating valuable areas of application for itself. However, most quotations were purely invented by GPT-3 and thus invalid. Our research showed that AI can contribute to public health research as a team member. According to authorship guidelines, the AI was ultimately not listed as a co-author, as it would be done with a human researcher. We conclude that good scientific practice also needs to be followed for AI contributions, and a broad scientific discourse on AI contributions is needed.
Title: Artificial Intelligence and Big Data in Public Health

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30544648/

Abstract: Artificial intelligence and automation are topics dominating global discussions on the future of professional employment, societal change, and economic performance. In this paper, we describe fundamental concepts underlying AI and Big Data and their significance to public health. We highlight issues involved and describe the potential impacts and challenges to medical professionals and diagnosticians. The possible benefits of advanced data analytics and machine learning are described in the context of recently reported research. Problems are identified and discussed with respect to ethical issues and the future roles of professionals and specialists in the age of artificial intelligence.
Title: Artificial intelligence in public health: the potential of epidemic early warning systems

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36967669/

Abstract: The use of artificial intelligence (AI) to generate automated early warnings in epidemic surveillance by harnessing vast open-source data with minimal human intervention has the potential to be both revolutionary and highly sustainable. AI can overcome the challenges faced by weak health systems by detecting epidemic signals much earlier than traditional surveillance. AI-based digital surveillance is an adjunct to-not a replacement of-traditional surveillance and can trigger early investigation, diagnostics and responses at the regional level. This narrative review focuses on the role of AI in epidemic surveillance and summarises several current epidemic intelligence systems including ProMED-mail, HealthMap, Epidemic Intelligence from Open Sources, BlueDot, Metabiota, the Global Biosurveillance Portal, Epitweetr and EPIWATCH. Not all of these systems are AI-based, and some are only accessible to paid users. Most systems have large volumes of unfiltered data; only a few can sort and filter data to provide users with curated intelligence. However, uptake of these systems by public health authorities, who have been slower to embrace AI than their clinical counterparts, is low. The widespread adoption of digital open-source surveillance and AI technology is needed for the prevention of serious epidemics.
Title: Global Epidemiology

Link: https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/global-epidemiology/special-issue/10D7BC80HH7

Abstract1: No Abstract 1 found

Abstract2: No Abstract 2 found

Conclusion: No Conclusion section found
Title: Priorities for successful use of artificial intelligence by public health organizations: a literature review

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36419010/

Abstract: Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to improve public health's ability to promote the health of all people in all communities. To successfully realize this potential and use AI for public health functions it is important for public health organizations to thoughtfully develop strategies for AI implementation. Six key priorities for successful use of AI technologies by public health organizations are discussed: 1) Contemporary data governance; 2) Investment in modernized data and analytic infrastructure and procedures; 3) Addressing the skills gap in the workforce; 4) Development of strategic collaborative partnerships; 5) Use of good AI practices for transparency and reproducibility, and; 6) Explicit consideration of equity and bias.
Title: Ethics Principles for Artificial Intelligence-Based Telemedicine for Public Health

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36893365/

Abstract: The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in the field of telemedicine has grown exponentially over the past decade, along with the adoption of AI-based telemedicine to support public health systems. Although AI-based telemedicine can open up novel opportunities for the delivery of clinical health and care and become a strong aid to public health systems worldwide, it also comes with ethical risks that should be detected, prevented, or mitigated for the responsible use of AI-based telemedicine in and for public health. However, despite the current proliferation of AI ethics frameworks, thus far, none have been developed for the design of AI-based telemedicine, especially for the adoption of AI-based telemedicine in and for public health. We aimed to fill this gap by mapping the most relevant AI ethics principles for AI-based telemedicine for public health and by showing the need to revise them via major ethical themes emerging from bioethics, medical ethics, and public health ethics toward the definition of a unified set of 6 AI ethics principles for the implementation of AI-based telemedicine. (Am J Public Health. 2023;113(5):577-584. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2023.307225).
Title: Machine learning and disease prediction in obstetrics

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37324652/

Abstract: Machine learning technologies and translation of artificial intelligence tools to enhance the patient experience are changing obstetric and maternity care. An increasing number of predictive tools have been developed with data sourced from electronic health records, diagnostic imaging and digital devices. In this review, we explore the latest tools of machine learning, the algorithms to establish prediction models and the challenges to assess fetal well-being, predict and diagnose obstetric diseases such as gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, preterm birth and fetal growth restriction. We discuss the rapid growth of machine learning approaches and intelligent tools for automated diagnostic imaging of fetal anomalies and to asses fetoplacental and cervix function using ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging. In prenatal diagnosis, we discuss intelligent tools for magnetic resonance imaging sequencing of the fetus, placenta and cervix to reduce the risk of preterm birth. Finally, the use of machine learning to improve safety standards in intrapartum care and early detection of complications will be discussed. The demand for technologies to enhance diagnosis and treatment in obstetrics and maternity should improve frameworks for patient safety and enhance clinical practice.
Title: Artificial intelligence in public health prevention of legionelosis in drinking water systems

Link: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25153475/

Abstract: Good quality water supplies and safe sanitation in urban areas are a big challenge for governments throughout the world. Providing adequate water quality is a basic requirement for our lives. The colony forming units of the bacterium Legionella pneumophila in potable water represent a big problem which cannot be overlooked for health protection reasons. We analysed several methods to program a virtual hot water tank with AI (artificial intelligence) tools including neuro-fuzzy systems as a precaution against legionelosis. The main goal of this paper is to present research which simulates the temperature profile in the water tank. This research presents a tool for a water management system to simulate conditions which are able to prevent legionelosis outbreaks in a water system. The challenge is to create a virtual water tank simulator including the water environment which can simulate a situation which is common in building water distribution systems. The key feature of the presented system is its adaptation to any hot water tank. While respecting the basic parameters of hot water, a water supplier and building maintainer are required to ensure the predefined quality and water temperature at each sampling site and avoid the growth of Legionella. The presented system is one small contribution how to overcome a situation when legionelosis could find good conditions to spread and jeopardize human lives.
